---
title: "UniGCA: A universal graph cellular automata framework for both raster and vector-based urban growth simulation"
collection: talks
type: "Talk"
permalink: /talks/2024-10-20-talk-1
venue: "2024 China Annual Conference on Theories and Methods of Geographic Information Science"
date: 2024-10-20
location: "Xi'an, China"
---
The cellular automata (CA) model, a widely-used method in urban growth simulations, embodies two paradigms: raster-based (RCA) and vector-based (VCA). Two paradigms operate on different types and sizes of data, necessitating a general representation capable of accommodating both flexibly. Inspired by previous works, we proposed a universal GCA (UniGCA) framework designed to equally support various data types and sizes. However, two fundamental capabilities of UniGCA framework—construct and process large-scale graph structure efficiently, and model complex spatial interactions—presents two significant challenges that require further investigation.
To tackle these challenges, the UniGCA framework incorporates four essential modules: graph construction, graph partitioning, graph neural network, and CA simulation. Specifically, the derived Multi-level Partitioned Graph U-Net Cellular Automata (MPGUN-CA) model introduces two optimized storage formats during graph construction. In graph partitioning, the framework groups geographically nearby units into clusters, which are then randomly connected through inter-cluster edges to form subgraphs. Additionally, the MPGUN-CA model utilizes the unique encoder-decoder architecture of Graph U-Net to effectively capture and integrate spatial dependencies across varying distances and model depths.
To evaluate the efficacy of the proposed model, two case studies were conducted using raster data from Shanghai, China, and vector data from Pine Catchment, Australia, spanning from 2005 to 2015. Compared to baseline models, our MPGUN-CA model has demonstrated significant improvements in accuracy, achieving an increase of 6.96% and 9.41% in the figure of merit (FoM) for Shanghai and Pine Catchment case studies, respectively. The superior performance of MPGUN-CA model demonstrates the effectiveness of UniGCA framework and suggests its potential to inspire future research focused on simulating urban growth from a universal perspective.
